# Bring your own Prometheus

- @pothulapati
- Start Date: 2020-04-15
- Target Date: 
- RFC PR: [linkerd/rfc#16](https://github.com/linkerd/rfc/pull/16)
- Linkerd Issue: [linkerd/linkerd2#3590](https://github.com/linkerd/linkerd2/issues/3590)
- Reviewers: @grampelberg @alpeb @siggy

## Summary

[summary]: #summary

This RFC aims to move prometheus as an add-on i.e not mandated but advised.
This includes moving the linkerd-prometheus manifests as a sub-chart and
allowing more configuration (more on this later), along with documentation
and tooling to use Linkerd with an existing prometheus installation.

## Problem Statement (Step 1)

[problem-statement]: #problem-statement

Lots of users already have a exisiting prometheus installation in their
cluster and don't like managing another prometheus instance especially
because they could be resource intensive and painful. They usually
have a prometheus installation paired up with a long term monitroing
solutions like Cortex,InfluxDB, or third party solutions like Grafana
Cloud, etc. In those cases prometheus is just a temporary component, that
keeps pushing metrics into their long term solution, making users want to
re-use their exisitng prometheus.

The following are the list of problems that we plan to solve:

- Hard requirement of linkerd-prometheus.

- Configuring the current linkerd-prometheus for remote-writes, etc is
hard, because the prometheus configmap is overridden after upgrades.

- Not enough documentation and tooling for bringing your own prometheus
use-case.

Once the RFC is implemented, Users should not only be able to use their
exisiting prometheus, but configuration of the linkerd-prometheus for
remote-writes, etc should also be easy.

## Design proposal (Step 2)

[design-proposal]: #design-proposal

### Prometheus as an Add-On

By moving Prometheus as an add-on, We can make it as an optional component
that can be used both through Helm and Linkerd CLI. The add-on model would
well with upgrades, etc as per [#3955](https://github.com/linkerd/linkerd2/pull/3955).
This is done by moving the prometheus components into a separate sub-chart
in the linkerd repo and updating the code. The same health checks are also
expected, but as a separate check Category, which would be transient i.e
runs only when it recognises that the add-on is enabled.

By default, the prometheus add-on will be **enabled**.

This also provides a single place of configuration for all things related to
linkerd-prometheus. Though we are making linkerd-prometheus optional but
having it is great for Linkerd and external users, for reasons like
separation of concerns, etc. By allowing the `remote-write`, `alerts`, etc
configuration in the linkerd-prometheus, we would decrease the need/want
for external users to tie their existing prometheus to Linkerd,
as it would be even easier for them to configure `remote-write`, etc
configuration from their exisiting prometheus to the linkerd-prometheus
right from the start.

The following default prometheus configuration is planned:

```yaml
prometheus:
  enabled: true
  name: linkerd-prometheus
  image:
  global:
    <global-prom-config> https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#configuration-file
  remote-write:
    <remote-write-config> https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#remote_write
  alerts:
    <alert-manager-config> https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#alertmanager_config 
```

All the current default configuration will be moved to `values.yaml` in the
above format, allowing users to override this by using Helm or  
`--addon-config` through CLI.

### Using Exisiting Prometheus

First, Documentation will be provided at `linkerd.io` to guide users on
adding the `scrape-configs` required, to get the metrics from linkerd
proxies, control plane components, etc. This can be found
[here](https://github.com/linkerd/linkerd2/blob/master/charts/linkerd2/templates/prometheus.yaml#L26).
Additional documentation on the storage requirements for Linkerd metrics
in prometheus can also be provided around existing installations with
longer retention times, scrape interval changes, etc.
This can also be automated like we already do with Linkerd CLI help and args.

Once this is done, Users should be able to see golden metrics, etc in their
exisiting prometheus instance. The `.Values.global.prometheusUrl` field helps users in
configuring Linkerd components i.e `public-api`,etc that needs prometheus
access to the exisiting prometheus installation.

`prometheusUrl` is present in `.Values.global` instead of `.Values.prometheus.` to allow this field to
be accessible by other addOn components like `grafana`, etc. `linkerd-config-addons` Configmap will also be updated to
store the same.

Flag interactions are defined below:

| `prometheus.enabled` | `global.prometheusUrl`              | Result                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|---------|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| true    | ""               | Install linkerd-prometheus, and configure control-plane components to use it.                                                                                                                                                                    |
| false   | "prometheus.xyz" | No linkerd-prometheus, control-plane components will be configured to url                                                                                                                                                                        |
| true    | "prometheus.xyz" | Install linkerd-prometheus, but stil configure control plane to use different url, useful when linkerd-prometheus is configured to remote-write into long term storage solution at url, Thus  powering dashboard and CLI through long term storage. |
| false   | ""               | No linkerd-prometheus, and no URL to power dashboards. (Should we even allow this?)                                                                                                                                                              |

#### User Expereince

Currently, `public-api`, `grafana` and `heartbeat` are the only three
components which are configured with a `prometheus-url` parameter,
All the Dashboards and CLI are powered through the `public-api`.
This allows us to swap prometheus without breaking any exisiting linkerd
tooling. Though it is expected that the `scrape-config` is configured
correctly, when this path is choosen.

If `prometheus-url` is not accessible, components like `public-api` should not fail
but just log some warning. So, that users can still access things like TAP, Checks, etc through the dashboard and CLI.

#### Linkerd CLI Tooling

When users get their own Prometheus, It would be really great to have
some tooling that allows users to check and troubleshoot if there are any
problems.

*linkerd check*

Checks can be added to report if the prometheus is configured correctly and is replying to queries.

- Check if the configured prometheus instance is healthy.
- if the relevant metrics are present in prometheus by querying, and warn the users about the same. User's
don't have to supply the `prometheusUrl` as we can access the same from `linkerd-config-addons` Configmap.
- More checks can be added here, if there are some known
configurations that don't go well with linkerd.

*linkerd prom-config*

A additional command can be provided in the CLI, which outputs the prometheus-config corresponding to that version of linkerd, which would
have the relevant scrape-configs and default configuration.


### Prior art

[prior-art]: #prior-art

- [Prometheus  Operator](https://github.com/coreos/prometheus-operator) is a interesting tool,
 which can remove the problem of maintaining configuration for upgrades, etc from Linkerd, 
 but comes with it's own controller and CRD's.
- Istio's [Bring your own Prometheus example](https://istiobyexample.dev/prometheus/). A similar helm
based sub-chart model is used but this was with Mixer v1.
- We already have docs for [exporting metrics](https://linkerd.io/2/tasks/exporting-metrics/).
We could update those docs, with remote-write, etc.

### Unresolved questions

[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- Should we support all prometheus configs in `linkerd-prometheus`?

- How do we keep track of metrics that the proxies expose, to have
consistent check tooling?

- Most third party storage solutions have some auth mechanisms, should we
allow that? IMO, we shouldn't focus on this in v1 but as folks start to call
out we can consider updating to handle that use case.

- Should we separate out each induvidual fields of `proemtheus` i.e `remoteWrite`, etc
into separate configmaps?

### Future possibilities

[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

In this proposal, we separate the query path with the linkerd-promethues,
Thus allowing users to use any third party long term storage solution that
follow the prometheus Query API to power Dashboards and CLI.

Also, The same `bring your own prometheus` document can be re-used for
solutions like [grafana cloud agent](https://grafana.com/blog/2020/03/18/introducing-grafana-cloud-agent-a-remote_write-focused-prometheus-agent-that-can-save-40-on-memory-usage/)
that follow the same prometheus scrape-config.
